The University of Alberta (U of A, UAlberta) is a public research university located in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. It was founded in 1908 by Alexander Cameron Rutherford,  the first premier of Alberta, and Henry Marshall Tory,  its first president. Its enabling legislation is the Post-secondary Learning Act. 

The university comprises four campuses in Edmonton, the Augustana Campus in Camrose, and a staff centre in downtown Calgary. The original north campus consists of 150 buildings covering 50 city blocks on the south rim of the North Saskatchewan River valley, directly across from downtown Edmonton. More than 38,000 students from across Canada and 144 other countries participate in nearly 400 programs in 18 faculties. With more than 15,000 employees, the university is Alberta's fourth-largest employer. 

The University of Alberta has been recognized by the Academic Ranking of World Universities,  the QS World University Rankings and the Times Higher Education World University Rankings as one of the top five universities in Canada and one of the top 100 universities worldwide. It has graduated more than 240,000 alumni, including a governor general and a prime minister of Canada, a justice of the Supreme Court of Canada, and a Nobel laureate.

History

Early history

The University of Alberta, a single, public provincial university, was chartered in 1906 in Edmonton, Alberta with a new University Act. The university was modelled on the American state university, with an emphasis on extension work and applied research. 

With the hiring of Henry Marshall Tory in 1907, the University of Alberta started operation in 1908, using temporary facilities while the first building on campus, Athabasca Hall, was under construction.  In a letter to Alexander Cameron Rutherford in early 1906, while he was in the process of setting up McGill University College in Vancouver, Tory wrote, "If you take any steps in the direction of a working University and wish to avoid the mistakes of the past, mistakes which have fearfully handicapped other institutions, you should start on a teaching basis."  The University of Alberta was established by the University Act, 1906  in the first session of the new Legislative Assembly, with Premier Alexander C. Rutherford as its sponsor.

The governance was modelled on Ontario's University of Toronto Act of 1906 which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate (faculty), responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (citizens) exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership. 

On September 23, 1908, 45 students attended classes in English, mathematics and modern languages, on the top floor of the Queen Alexandra Elementary School in Strathcona. Dr. Henry Marshall Tory (1864–1947) was the first director. 

Percy Erskine Nobbs & Frank Darling designed the master plan for the University of Alberta 1909–10. Nobbs designed the Arts Building (1914–15); laboratories and Power House (1914). With Cecil S. Burgess, Nobbs designed the Provincial College of Medicine (1920–21).  

Herbert Alton Magoon (architect) designed several buildings on campus including: the residence for Prof. Rupert C. Lodge, 1913; and St. Stephen's Methodist College, on the campus of the University of Alberta, 1910. 
It awarded its first degrees in 1912.  In 1912 the university established its Department of Extension. In the early part of the 20th century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law and medicine. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis was introduced.  In 1929, the university established a School of Education. In 1932, the University Department of Extension established the Banff School of Finer Arts.

The policy of university education initiated in the 1960s responded to population pressure and the belief that higher education was a key to social justice and economic productivity for individuals and for society. On September 19, 1960, the university opened a new 130-hectare campus in Calgary, Alberta. 

In 1966, the University of Alberta introduced a master's program in community development.

The single-university policy in the West was changed as existing colleges of the provincial universities gained autonomy as universities. The University of Calgary was established in 1966.  The University of Alberta first offered programs of study at Calgary in 1945 and continued until 1966 when the University of Calgary was established as an autonomous institution.  Canada's first organ transplant research group was established at the University of Alberta on April 2, 1970, by the Medical Research Council. 

In 1976, structural engineer Reuben VandeKraats made the decision to add a more complex building style to the newly designed science and art wings of the school. 

Gladys Young donated $3.7 million to the university undergraduate scholarship fund in memory of Roland Young, who graduated from the U of A in 1928. 
Location

Heated wrangling took place between the cities of Calgary and Edmonton over the location of the provincial capital and the location of the university. It was stated that the capital would be north of the North Saskatchewan River and that the university would be in a city south of it.  In the end, the city of Edmonton became the capital and the then-separate city of Strathcona on the south bank of the river, where Premier Alexander Rutherford lived, was granted the university, much to the chagrin of Calgary for many years to come.

In 1912, the two cities of Edmonton and Strathcona were amalgamated under the name of the former. Edmonton had thus become both the political and academic capital, at the expense of Calgary. This was just one act in a larger rivalry between the two cities, often called the Battle of Alberta.

Faculties

In 1913, a medical school established at the University of Alberta in Edmonton was opened.  By 1920, the university had six faculties (Arts and Sciences, Applied Science, Agriculture, Medicine, Dentistry, and Law) and two schools (Pharmacy and Accountancy). It awarded a range of degrees: Bachelor of Arts (BA), Bachelor of Science (BSc), Bachelor of Science in Agriculture (BSA), Bachelor of Laws (LLB), Bachelor of Pharmacy (PhmB), Bachelor of Divinity (BD), Master of Arts (MA), Master of Science (MSc), and Doctor of Laws (LLD). There were 851 male students and 251 female students, and 171 academic staff, including 14 women. 